Makes vehicle capacity at stations consistent between station_information and status (#547)
MobilityData/gbfs: gbfs.md

\-&nbsp;`parking_hoop`<br/>*(added in v2.3)* | OPTIONAL | Boolean | Are parking hoops present at this station?<br /><br />`true` - Parking hoops are present at this station.<br />`false` - Parking hoops are not present at this station.<br /><br />Parking hoops are lockable devices that are used to secure a parking space to prevent parking of unauthorized vehicles.
\-&nbsp;`contact_phone`<br/>*(added in v2.3)* | OPTIONAL | Phone number | Contact phone of the station.
\-&nbsp;`capacity` | OPTIONAL | Non-negative integer | Number of total docking points installed at this station, both available and unavailable, regardless of what vehicle types are allowed at each dock. <br/><br/>If this is a virtual station defined using the `is_virtual_station` field, this number represents the total number of vehicles of all types that can be parked at the virtual station.<br/><br/>If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` are defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.

> \-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_area_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below.  These objects are used to model the parking capacity of virtual stations (defined using the `is_virtual_station` field) for each vehicle type that can be returned to this station.

Reviewer: Suggestions: 
- Change the field name to `vehicle_types_capacity` for consistency with `vehicle_types_available` in [station_status.json](https://github.com/MobilityData/gbfs/blob/master/gbfs.md#station_statusjson) and with `vehicle_docks_capacity` below.
- Match the total count language used for `vehicle_types_available` in [station_status.json](https://github.com/MobilityData/gbfs/blob/master/gbfs.md#station_statusjson).

```suggestion
\-&nbsp;`vehicle_types_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below.  These objects are used to model the parking capacity of virtual stations (defined using the `is_virtual_station` field) for each vehicle type that can be returned to this station. The total number of vehicles from each of these objects SHOULD add up to match the value specified in the `capacity` field.
```

> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.

Reviewer: Adds that the change is as of v3.0.

```suggestion
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.
```

> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Yes | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_type_area_capacity` is defined. A number representing the total number of vehicles of the specified `vehicle_type_ids` that can park within the virtual station.<br /><br />If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` is defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.

Reviewer: These 2 fields should also be `Conditionally REQUIRED` (the description says "REQUIRED if"):

```suggestion
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_type_area_capacity` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_type_area_capacity` is defined. A number representing the total number of vehicles of the specified `vehicle_type_ids` that can park within the virtual station.<br /><br />If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` is defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.
```

> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity ` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.
> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity ` is defined. A number representing the total number of vehicles of the specified `vehicle_type_ids` that can park within the virtual station.<br /><br />If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` is defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.

Reviewer: Remove extra space after vehicle_types_capacity.

```suggestion
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity` is defined. A number representing the total number of vehicles of the specified `vehicle_type_ids` that can park within the virtual station.<br /><br />If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` is defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.
```

> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_type_area_capacity` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.
> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_type_area_capacity` is defined. A number representing the total number of vehicles of the specified `vehicle_type_ids` that can park within the virtual station.<br /><br />If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` is defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.

Reviewer: Change the field name to `vehicle_types_capacity` for consistency with `vehicle_types_available` in [station_status.json](https://github.com/MobilityData/gbfs/blob/master/gbfs.md#station_statusjson) and with `vehicle_docks_capacity` below.

```suggestion
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity ` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity ` is defined. A number representing the total number of vehicles of the specified `vehicle_type_ids` that can park within the virtual station.<br /><br />If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` is defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.
```

> \-&nbsp;`vehicle_docks_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below. These objects are used to model the total docking capacity of a station, both available and unavailable, for each type of vehicle that may dock at this station. The total capacity should correspond with 

Author: Sorry -- left a hanging clause here.
```suggestion
\-&nbsp;`vehicle_docks_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below. These objects are used to model the total docking capacity of a station, both available and unavailable, for each type of vehicle that may dock at this station. The total of these values should equal the total `capacity` value.
```

Reviewer: @cmonagle Good catch! 

Small detail: in the last sentence, can we use code quotes instead of regular quotes for "capacity" to highlight that it's a field in the spec?

```The total of these values should equal the total `capacity` value.```

Author: Thanks @richfab , I just updated it, will commit the suggestion now.

> \-&nbsp;`vehicle_docks_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below. These objects are used to model the total docking capacity of a station, both available and unavailable, for each type of vehicle that may dock at this station. The total of these values should equal the total `capacity` value.

Reviewer 2: Is this "should" a `SHOULD` or just a regular `should`?

Reviewer 3: To avoid any ambiguity, this `should` MUST be replaced by either `SHOULD` or `MUST`.

I think `SHOULD` is the best solution, as "that there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore" it (maybe if the capacity is not strictly correlated to the number of docks or if some type of docks overlap)

`MUST`/`SHOULD`: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119

Reviewer: I would be in favour of using SHOULD as there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to have a mismatch with `capacity` (I don't know any example though).

Note that the language currently used for `vehicle_docks_available` in [station_status.json](https://github.com/MobilityData/gbfs/blob/master/gbfs.md#station_statusjson) is SHOULD.

```suggestion
\-&nbsp;`vehicle_docks_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below. These objects are used to model the total docking capacity of a station, both available and unavailable, for each type of vehicle that may dock at this station. The total number of docks from each of these objects SHOULD add up to match the value specified in the `capacity` field.
```

Author: Thanks for catching this! I ought to have put "MUST", but am open to revisiting if there are other cases that I haven't considered.

In the case of overlapping dock/space types: this would be represented by including each union of supported vehicle types in a separate array item.

For example (In a system with scooters, bikes, and ebikes):
A station has a total capacity of 10, half of which support all vehicles, and half support only pedal bikes.
There would be two `vehicle_docks_capacity` array items:
- one with _all_ `vehicle_type_ids` and a `count` of 5
- one with just the pedal bike id, and another `count` of 5

This is a break from the previous format, where you would have one array item for each vehicle type:
`vehicle_type_id: pedal_bike, count: 10`, scooter: 5, ebike: 5 etc.,  which would often lead to a different `total_capacity` from the sum of each item in the array, when there are overlapping dock types.

I think capacity should (MUST) be correlated with the total number of spaces for each item in the array, but maybe I'm misunderstanding the situation you're describing, or there's some other case I haven't considered.

Reviewer: @tdelmas @testower or others, can you think of a use case where the total number of docks from each type of dock would **not** add up to match the station `capacity`?

Reviewer 2: I dont have any concrete examples, but overlapping dock types seems to be a fairly obvious theoretical case

Reviewer: At the risk of repeating @cmonagle's explanation: overlapping dock types _can_ be represented even with the clause "total number of docks `MUST` equal the `capacity`":

Indeed, in @cmonagle's example, the total number of docks from each objects _does_ adds up to the`capacity`, even with overlapping dock types (ie: the 5 docks that can accept pedal bikes and ebikes):

station_information.json:
```
"capacity": 10,
"vehicle_docks_capacity": [
  {
    "vehicle_type_ids": ["pedal_bike", "ebike"],
    "count": 5
  },
  {
    "vehicle_type_ids": ["pedal_bike"],
    "count": 5
  }
]
```

The question is: are there concrete or theoretical use cases where a station would have a `capacity` that is different from the number of docks?

Reviewer 2: Thanks 😅 no I can’t think of any examples

Reviewer: Thank you all for your participation.

Feel free to open a new issue to continue the discussion if needed. Thanks!

> \-&nbsp;`vehicle_types_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below.  These objects are used to model the parking capacity of virtual stations (defined using the `is_virtual_station` field) for each vehicle type that can be returned to this station. The total number of vehicles from each of these objects SHOULD add up to match the value specified in the `capacity` field.
> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.
> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity` is defined. A number representing the total number of vehicles of the specified `vehicle_type_ids` that can park within the virtual station.<br /><br />If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` is defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.
> \-&nbsp;`vehicle_docks_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below. These objects are used to model the total docking capacity of a station, both available and unavailable, for each type of vehicle that may dock at this station. The total number of docks from each of these objects SHOULD add up to match the value specified in the `capacity` field.
> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_docks_capacity` is defined. An array of strings where each string represents a `vehicle_type_id` that is able to use a particular type of dock at the station.

Reviewer: As of v3.0-RC2

```suggestion
\-&nbsp;`vehicle_types_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0-RC2)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below.  These objects are used to model the parking capacity of virtual stations (defined using the `is_virtual_station` field) for each vehicle type that can be returned to this station. The total number of vehicles from each of these objects SHOULD add up to match the value specified in the `capacity` field.
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids` <br/>*(as of v3.0-RC2)* | Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity` is defined. A number representing the total number of vehicles of the specified `vehicle_type_ids` that can park within the virtual station.<br /><br />If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` is defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.
\-&nbsp;`vehicle_docks_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0-RC2)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below. These objects are used to model the total docking capacity of a station, both available and unavailable, for each type of vehicle that may dock at this station. The total number of docks from each of these objects SHOULD add up to match the value specified in the `capacity` field.
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids` <br/>*(as of v3.0-RC2)* | Conditionally REQUIRED | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_docks_capacity` is defined. An array of strings where each string represents a `vehicle_type_id` that is able to use a particular type of dock at the station.
```

> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_docks_capacity` is defined. The total number of docks at the station, both available and unavailable, that may accept the corresponding vehicle type as defined by its `vehicle_type_id`.

Reviewer: The `vehicle_docks_capacity.count` description was referencing the field `vehicle_type_id` instead of `vehicle_type_ids` (plural)

```suggestion
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Conditionally REQUIRED | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_docks_capacity` is defined. A number representing the total number of docks at the station, both available and unavailable, that may accept the vehicle types specified by `vehicle_type_ids`.
```

\-&nbsp;`vehicle_types_capacity` <br/>*(as of v3.0)* | OPTIONAL | Array | This field's value is an array of objects containing the keys `vehicle_type_ids` and `count` defined below.  These objects are used to model the parking capacity of virtual stations (defined using the `is_virtual_station` field) for each vehicle type that can be returned to this station. The total number of vehicles from each of these objects SHOULD add up to match the value specified in the `capacity` field.
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids`| Yes | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_type_area_capacity` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.

> &emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Yes | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_type_area_capacity` is defined. A number representing the total number of vehicles of the specified `vehicle_type_ids` that can park within the virtual station.<br /><br />If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` is defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.

Reviewer: Thank you @cmonagle!

`vehicle_types_capacity` also appears in the 2 rows below and in "Example 2: Virtual station" lower in the file 🕵️ 

```suggestion
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`vehicle_type_ids`| Yes | Array | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity` is defined. The `vehicle_type_ids`, as defined in `vehicle_types.json`, that may park at the virtual station.
&emsp;&emsp;\-&nbsp;`count`| Yes | Non-negative integer | REQUIRED if `vehicle_types_capacity` is defined. A number representing the total number of vehicles of the specified `vehicle_type_ids` that can park within the virtual station.<br /><br />If the virtual station is defined by `station_area`, this is the number that can park within the station area. If `lat`/`lon` is defined, this is the number that can park at those coordinates.
```

Reviewer: Resolved in https://github.com/MobilityData/gbfs/pull/547/commits/08b328aab2c1e9157fee40c00d2dbdbf98bb3e23

        "capacity": 16,

>         "vehicle_type_area_capacity": [

Reviewer: Change the field name to `vehicle_types_capacity` for consistency with `vehicle_types_available` in [station_status.json](https://github.com/MobilityData/gbfs/blob/master/gbfs.md#station_statusjson) and with `vehicle_docks_capacity` above.

```suggestion
        "vehicle_types_capacity": [
```

          {
            "vehicle_type_ids": ["abc123", "def456"],
            "count": 15
          },

>                     {

Reviewer: Remove extra spaces

```suggestion
          {
```
